---
date: 2024-05-31T20:54:00
tags:
  - AlgebraicGeometry
  - EtaleCohomology
  - ReadingGroup
type: Notes
summary:
---
```table-of-contents
title: 
style: nestedList # TOC style (nestedList|nestedOrderedList|inlineFirstLevel)
minLevel: 0 # Include headings from the specified level
maxLevel: 0 # Include headings up to the specified level
includeLinks: true # Make headings clickable
debugInConsole: false # Print debug info in Obsidian console
```
## Introduction

These are a collection of notes on the Etale Fundamental Group associated with a lecture given by Dr. William Chen at UIUC. These notes are part of an ongoing reading group on Etale cohomology at UIUC in summer 2024.

**References:** 
- Hatcher - Algebraic topology
- Volklen - Groups as Galois groups
- Szamuely - Galois groups and fundamental groups. (has Galois categories and full generality on etale fundamental groups)
- Grothendieck - SGA I (Expose V)

## Classical Fundamental Group

To begin let $X$ be a "nice" topological space (e.g. in triply connected). Let $p:Y\to X$ be a covering space over $X$. We define the degree of the cover $p$ to be the cardinality of a fiber $p^{-1}(\{x\})$, for $x \in X$. Note this is constant over connected components of $X$.

In this context it turns out we can classify coverings using the fundamental group. Indeed, we can characterize path-connected covering spaces, with chosen basepoints, up to isomorphism, by the subgroups of the fundamental group $\pi_1(X,x_0)$. In particular, $\pi_1(X,x_0)$ acts on the fiber $Y_{x_0} := f^{-1}(\{x_0\})$.

Let $\text{Cov}(X)$ be full subcategory of the slice category $\mathsf{Top}/X$ consisting of "nice" coverings. Then the **monodromy action** gives us a **fiber functor**
$$
F_{x_0}:\text{Cov}(X)\to \pi_1(X,x_0)\text{-}\mathsf{Sets}
$$
sending a cover $p:Y\to X$ to the monodromy action of $\pi_1(X,x_0)$ on the fiber $p^{-1}(\{x_0\})$. Note that we can obtain data about the cover $Y$ from the monodromy action. For example, $Y$ is path-connected if and only if its monodromy action is transitive.

`\begin{proof}`

`\end{proof}`

>[!theorem] Galois Correspondence
>If $X$ is connected, the fiber functor $F_{x_0}$ is an equivalence of categories.

>[!corollary] 
>If $p:Y\to X$ is a covering, then the connected components of $Y$ are in bijection with the orbits of $\pi_1(X,x_0)$ acting on $Y_{x_0}$.

`\begin{proof}[Proof Idea.]`
If $Z \subseteq Y$ is a connected component, $F_{x_0}(Z)$ is a transitive $\pi_1(X,x_0)$-sets, and we have a map of $\pi_1(X,x_0)$-sets $F_{x_0}(Z)\to F_{x_0}(Y)$, which is an injection. It follows that $F_{x_0}(Z)$ is an orbit. 
`\end{proof}`

>[!corollary] Subgroup Galois Correspondence
>Isomorphism classes of connected covers of $X$ of degree $d$ are in bijection with conjugacy classes of index $d$ subgroups of $\pi_1(X,x_0)$.

^a26f2b

`\begin{proof}[Proof Idea.]`
Given a degree $d$ cover $p:Y\to X$, we have the monodromy action of $\pi_1(X,x_0)$ on $Y_{x_0}$, where $\#Y_{x_0} = d$. Then we can associate to it the stabilizer $\text{Stab}_{\pi_1(X,x_0)}(y)$ for any $y \in Y_{x_0}$. Since the action is transitive, the stabilizer subgroup is of index $d$.
`\end{proof}`

Recall that a cover is Galois (aka normal in Hatcher) if the corresponding subgroup is normal.

>[!example]
>Let $X = \mathbb{C}^\times$, so $\pi_1(X,1) \cong \mathbb{Z}$ generated by a counter-clockwise unit loop around zero, $\omega$. For every integer $d \geq 1$, [[Etale Fundamental Group#^a26f2b]] implies that there exists a unique (up to isomorphism) connected cover of $\mathbb{C}^\times$ of degree $d$.

## Fundamental Group for Schemes

If we want to emulate this theory for schemes, how do we do it? What is the issue? It turns out that any irreducible scheme is topologically contractible, so working with the classical fundamental group with homotopy classes will almost always be trivial. (the idea behind this fact is that you can take the generic point as a basepoint and contract the whole scheme around the generic point)

What we care about $\pi_1$ (at least at the moment) isn't the loops in its definition, but rather the way it classifies covers. Thus, we will effectively define the Etale fundamental group to be that which classifies etale covers.

>[!def] Galois Category (SGA I, V.4)
>A category $\mathcal{C}$ with a functor $F:\mathcal{C}\to \mathsf{FinSet}$, called the **fundamental (or fiber) functor** is a **Galois category** if the pair $(\mathcal{C},F)$ satisfies 
>- $\mathcal{C}$ has finite (co)limits
>- Every arrow $f:X\to Y$ of $\mathcal{C}$ factorizes as a composition of a **strict epimorphism** $u:X\to Z$ and the **coprojection $v:Z\to Y$ for a coproduct decomposition $Y \cong Z\amalg Z'$, where $v$ is a monomorphism
>- $F$ is preserves finite (co)limits (i.e. is **exact**)
>- $F$ is **conservative** (i.e. it reflects isomorphisms)

We think of a Galois category as a category of covers.

>[!example]
>- The category $\mathsf{FinCov}(X)$ for $X \in \mathsf{Top}$ connected, with $F = F_{x_0}$, the fiber functor, is a Galois category. (the terminal object, as in the slice category, is $X$ with the identity map)
>- The category $\mathsf{FEt}_X:= \{f:Y\to X\;\text{finite etale}\}$ of finite etale covers for a scheme $X$, with $F = F_{x}$ where $x:\mathsf{Spec}\,\Omega\to X$ is a **geometric point** (i.e. $\Omega$ is an algebraically closed field). 
>- The category $\mathcal{C}(\pi) =$ finite sets with $\pi$-action, with $\pi$ a fixed **profinite group**, with $F$ the forgetful functor, is a Galois category, where our $\pi$-action is our "monodromy action". (the terminal object is the one point set with the trivial action)

How do we talk about monodromy in Galois categories? What is the fundamental group? We want to model the equivalence of categories we obtain in the topological case. In the setting of a Galois category $(\mathcal{C},F)$, 

>[!theorem] Galois Correspondence
>Let $(\mathcal{C},F)$ be a Galois category. Let $\pi := \text{Aut}(F)$ be the **etale fundamental group** of the Galois category. Equivalently,
>$$\text{Aut}(F) \cong \lim\limits_{\leftarrow Y/X\;\text{Galois}}\text{Aut}(Y/X)^{op}$$
>i.e. the inverse limit of the automorphism groups of galois covers. 
>1. Then $F$ defines an equivalence of categories
>$$\mathcal{C}\xrightarrow{F} \mathcal{C}(\pi)$$
>2. There exists a **pro-object** $P \in \mathsf{Pro}\text{-}\mathcal{C}$ such that $F(X) \cong \mathsf{Hom}_{\mathsf{Pro}\text{-}\mathcal{C}}(P,X)$ naturally in $X$ for any fundamental functor $F$. ($P$ can be thought of as being given by an "inverse limit over Galois covers" which can be thought of like the universal cover) This implies that $F\cong F'$ for any fundamental functors, and further $\text{Aut}(F)\cong \text{Aut}(F')$, where the isomorphism is "canonical up to inner automorphisms of $\text{Aut}(F)$ (or $\text{Aut}(F')$)".

Note that the etale fundamental group is always a **profinite group** (whereas the topological fundamental group need not be a profinite group). Recall that a profinite group is a topological group that is isomorphic to the inverse limit of an cofiltered system of discrete finite groups.

**Slogan:** Whenever you have a group acting on a discrete set you should think of Galois theory! (can you think of this as an object in some Galois category?)

>[!example]
>If $X \in \mathsf{Top}$, and let $x \in X$. Then $$\pi_1^{et}(X,x)\cong \widehat{\pi_1(X,x)}$$
>i.e. the profinite completion of the fundamental group.

Recall that the **profinite completion** of a group $G$ is to take the inverse system to be those quotients $G/N$ of finite index.

>[!example]
>Let $X$ be a **smooth algebraic curve** over $\mathbb{C}$ (not necessarily proper), then $\pi_1^{et}(X,x)$, for $x:\mathsf{Spec}(\mathbb{C})\to X$ a **complex point**, is isomorphic to
>$$\pi_1^{et}(X,x)\cong \widehat{\pi_1(X(\mathbb{C}),x)}$$
>where the right side is the is the profinite completion of the fundamental group of $X(\mathbb{C}) = \mathsf{Hom}(\mathsf{Spec}(\mathbb{C}),X)$ with the complex topology given by embedding it into an ambient $\mathbb{C}^n$, and the left hand side is the fundamental group of $\mathsf{FEt}_X$ with respect to the fiber functor $F_x$ sending a Galois cover $Y\to X$ in $\mathsf{FEt}_X$ to the fiber $Y_x$ (i.e. the pullback of $Y\to X$ along $x$).
>
>This is a deep isomorphism which can be deduced from the Riemann existence theorem, which allows us to deduce that finite topological covers of $X(\mathbb{C})$ are algebraic in a certain sense.

>[!example]
>Let $X = \mathsf{Spec}(K)$, or $K$ a field, and $K^{sep}$ its separable closure. Then $\pi_1^{et}(\mathsf{Spec}(K),x)$, for $x :\mathsf{Spec}(K^{sep})\to \mathsf{Spec}(K)$, is isomorphic to the **absolute fundamental group** $$\mathsf{Gal}(K^{sep}/K) = \lim\limits_{\leftarrow L/K, \text{ Galois}}\text{Gal}(L/K)$$
>In some sense this says that the spectrum of a field which is not algebraically closed should "note be simply connected" (i.e. it has non-trivial etale fundamental group).


>[!example]
>If $L/K$ is a Galois extension of fields, the category of intermediate extensions, given geometrically by $\mathsf{Spec}(F)\to \mathsf{Spec}(K)$, with $L \supseteq F\supseteq K$, is a Galois category with fundamental group $\pi \cong \text{Gal}(L/K)$ and pro-object $\mathsf{Spec}(L)\to \mathsf{Spec}(K)$.

### Functoriality

If $\mathcal{C}\to \mathcal{D}$ is an exact functor of Galois categories (i.e. it preserves finite (co)limits), then $\mathcal{C}\to \mathcal{D}\xrightarrow{F_\mathcal{D}}\mathsf{FinSet}$ is a fundamental functor of $\mathcal{C}$.

>[!example]
>If $f:X\to Y$ is a morphism in $\mathsf{Sch}$, then $f^*:\mathsf{FEt}_Y\to \mathsf{FEt}_X$ is exact.

Consider $\mathsf{Spec}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}})\xrightarrow{x} X\xrightarrow{p}Y$, then we have a map
$$\mathsf{FEt}_Y\xrightarrow{p^*}\mathsf{FEt}_X\xrightarrow{F_x}\mathsf{Set}$$
which induces a map
$$\text{Aut}(F_x)\xrightarrow{(p^*)_*}\text{Aut}(F_x\circ p^*)$$
given by whiskering automorphisms, which in fact will be a **continuous group homomorphism of pro-finite groups**. Note that the left hand side is $\pi_1^{et}(X,x)$, while the right hand side is isomorphic to $\pi_1^{et}(Y,p\circ x)$, due to the claim prior to the above example.

>[!proposition]
>The map $(p^*)_*:\pi_1(X,x)\to \pi_1(Y,y)$ (where $y = p\circ x$) is surjective if and only if for any connected $Z\to Y$ (in $\mathsf{FEt}_Y$), $Z\times_YX$ is connected.

**Q.** What about injectivity? Can you characterize the kernel? What about the image? (answers to this and related questions can be found in SGA I, V.6)

### Permanence Properties

The theory of etale fundamental groups is incredibly vast. However, below are a number of useful properties:
1. If $L/K$ is an extension of algebraically closed fields of characteristic $0$, then $X_L\to X_K$ (for $X$ a scheme over $K$) induces an isomorphism of $\pi_1^{et}$. This implies that if $X$ is a curve over $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$, then $\pi_1^{et}(X_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}},...)$ is isomorphic to $\pi_1^{et}(X_{\mathbb{C}},...)$, which is isomorphic to $\widehat{\pi_1(X(\mathbb{C}),...)}$, i.e. the pro-finite completion of the fundamental group of $X(\mathbb{C})$.
2. If $X \subseteq Y$ is a closed subscheme with the same topological space (e.g. $X = Y_{red})$, then the pullback functor from schemes etale over $Y$ to schemes etale over $X$ is an equivalence of categories, called the "**topological invariance of the etale site**". This is related to deformation theory and the study of moduli spaces.

### Applications

1. Finite etale group schemes/**torsors**: Recall that $\text{FEt}_X$ is isomorphic to finite $\pi_1^{et}(X)\text{-}\mathsf{Set}$, where we drop the basepoint since this is independent of the choice of basepoint. A finite etale group scheme is simply a group scheme which is finite etale over its base. It follows that finite etale groups schemes over $X$ is isomorphic to finite groups with $\pi_1^{et}(X)$ action by group automorphrisms (i.e. a map $\pi_1^{et}(X)\to \text{Aut}(G)$ for $G$ a finite group).
>[!example]
>Consider the constant group scheme $(\mathbb{Z}/n)_{\mathbb{Q}}$ which consists of $n$ copies of $\mathbb{Q}$, which corresponds to the absolute galois group action $\text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/\mathbb{Q})\to (\mathbb{Z} / n)^\times \cong \text{Aut}(\mathbb{Z} / n)$ given by the trivial map. On the other hand, the group of $n$th roots of unity, $\mu_{n,\mathbb{Q}}$, corresponds to the non-trivial action $\text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/\mathbb{Q})\xrightarrow{\chi_{eye}} (\mathbb{Z} / n)^\times$ given by a non-trivial character.
>
>On maps we have that $$\text{Hom}_K((\mathbb{Z} / n)_K, \mu_{n,K}) \cong \text{Hom}_{\text{Gal}_K}(\mathbb{Z} / n,\mathbb{Z} / n) = \text{Gal}_K\text{-invariants of }\text{Gal}_K\text{ on }\mu_{n,K}$$
>For a scheme $S$, this implies that 
>$$\text{Hom}_S((\mathbb{Z} / n)_S,\mu_{n,S})\cong \mu_n(S)$$
>naturally in $S$, and in fact $$\mathscr{Hom}((\mathbb{Z} / n)_S,\mu_{n,S})\cong \mu_n$$
>as sheaves (i.e. $\mu_{n,S}$ is the **Cartier dual** of $(\mathbb{Z} / n)_S$).
2. If $X$ is a scheme and $\mathcal{G}$ is a finite etale group scheme over $X$, then $H_{et}^1(X,\mathcal{G})$ is the set of $\mathcal{G}$-torsors over $X$, which is isomorphic to $H^1(\pi_1^{et}(X),G)$, where $G$ is a fiber of $\mathcal{G}$ with $\pi_1^{et}(X)$-action (this is the Galois correspondence). This gives a bijection/isomorphism between a very geometric thing ($\mathcal{G}$-torsors) and a very combinatorial thing (group cohomology). If $\gamma = \mathsf{Spec}(\mathbb{Q}))$, this is the usual correspondence between etale cohomology and Galois cohomology.
3. **Anabelian geometry**: Let $X = \mathbb{P}^1_{\mathbb{Q}}-\{0,1,\infty\}$. Let $x:\mathsf{Spec}(\mathbb{Q})\to X$ be any $\mathbb{Q}$-point of $X$, and let $\overline{x}:\mathsf{Spec}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}})\to \mathsf{Spec}(\mathbb{Q})\xrightarrow{x} X$. Then we get a short exact sequence of etale fundamental groups $$1 \to \pi_1^{et}(X_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}},\overline{x})\to \pi_1^{et}(X,\overline{x})\to \text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/\mathbb{Q})\to 1$$
is an exact sequence which splits on the right via $x$. Recall that the left hand group is isomorphic to $\pi_1^{et}(X_\mathbb{C},\overline{x})$, which is isomorphic to the profinite completion of $\pi_1(X(\mathbb{C}),\overline{x})$, which is $\widehat{\mathbb{F}_2}$, the profinite group of rank $2$. From the exact sequence we get an action of $\text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/\mathbb{Q})$ on $\pi_1^{et}(X_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}}) \cong \widehat{\mathbb{F}_2}$.

>[!theorem]
>This action is faithful.

`\begin{proof}`
Its kernel is $\text{Gal}(\overline{Q}/K)$ for some field $K$. Want to show that $K = \overline{\mathbb{Q}}$. Let $E$ be any elliptic curve over $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$. By **Belyi's Theorem**, there exists a finite set $Z \subseteq E$ such that $E^{\circ} := E-Z$ admits a finite etale degree $d$ map into $X_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}}$, $\rho_E$, and so $\pi_1^{et}(X_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}})$ has a map to the symmetric group determined by $E$, $\overline{\rho}_E$. Then
$$1\to \pi_1^{et}(X_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}})\to \pi_1^{et}(X_K)\to \text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/K)\to 1$$
which splits by some point of $X$, and so $\pi_1^{et}(X_K)$ is a semi-direct product of the left and right factors, where the action is trivial since the kernel is $\text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/K)$. Then for any map $f$ from $\text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/K)$ to $S_d$, we obtain a map from $\pi_1^{et}(X_K)$ using the universal property of the product, and this map corresponds to a connected cover of $X_K$ whose base change to $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$ is $E$, so $E$ is defined over $K$. But as this works for all elliptic curves over $\overline{\mathbb{Q}}$ we must have that $K = \overline{\mathbb{Q}}$.
`\end{proof}`
>[!corollary]
>$\text{Gal}(\overline{\mathbb{Q}}/\mathbb{Q})$ is "**canonically**" a subgroup $\text{Out}(\widehat{\mathbb{F}_2})$.


#### References

