---
date: 2024-05-27T01:22:00
tags:
  - AlgebraicGeometry
  - Schemes
  - TextbookNotes
type: Notes
summary:
---
```table-of-contents
title: 
style: nestedList # TOC style (nestedList|nestedOrderedList|inlineFirstLevel)
minLevel: 0 # Include headings from the specified level
maxLevel: 0 # Include headings up to the specified level
includeLinks: true # Make headings clickable
debugInConsole: false # Print debug info in Obsidian console
```
## Introduction

In these notes we review and discuss a number of basic properties of schemes, following the exposition in Vakil[^1].

## Noetherian Schemes

A Noetherian scheme generalizes the notion of a Noetherian ring and a Noetherian topological space. Recall that a topological space $X$ is said to be **Noetherian** if it satisfies the **DCC** for closed subsets (note the contravariance in comparison to the Noetherian condition on rings. This is due to the fact that the spec functor is contravariant and so turns the ACC for rings into a DCC for spaces).

>[!def] Noetherian Scheme
>A scheme $X$ is said to be **locally Noetherian** if there exists an open affine cover of $X$ by Noetherian rings. $X$ is **Noetherian** if it is locally Noetherian and quasi-compact.

I claim that being locally Noetherian satisfies [[Basic Properties of Morphisms of Schemes#^b058ea]], and so the condition holds for all open affine subsets. This corresponds to the following properties for Noetherian rings

>[!proposition] Properties of Noetherian Rings
>If $A$ is Noetherian then any localization of $A$ is Noetherian. If $f_1,...,f_n$ is a finite generating set of $A$ such that $A_{f_i}$ is Noetherian for each $i$, then $A$ is Noetherian.

`\begin{proof}`
For the first claim let $S \subseteq A$ be a multiplicatively closed subset. Let $I_1\subseteq I_2\subseteq \cdots$ be a chain of ideals in $S^{-1}A$. Then $A\cap I_1\subseteq A\cap I_2\subseteq \cdots$ is a chain of ideals in $A$. If $A$ is Noetherian then there exists $n \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $A\cap I_k = A\cap I_{k+1}$ for all $k \geq n$. But, if $r/s \in I_{k+1}$, then $r \in A\cap I_k$, and so $r/s \in I_k$, and hence $I_k = I_{k+1}$. Thus the chain stabilizes and $S^{-1}A$ is Noetherian.

Suppose now that $A$ is generated by $f_1,...,f_n$ for which $A_{f_i}$ is Noetherian. Let $I_1\subseteq I_2\subseteq \cdots$ be a chain of ideals in $A$. Then for each $1 \leq i \leq n$ there exists $N_i$ such that $(I_1)_{f_i}\subseteq (I_2)_{f_i}\subseteq \cdots$ stabilizes after $N_i$. Let $N = \max\{N_1,...,N_n\}$. Now, let $k \geq N$ and let $b \in I_{k+1}$. Then for each $1 \leq i \leq n$ there exists $b_i \in I_k$ such that $b_i/f_i^{n_i} = b/1$, so there exists $m_i \geq 0$ such that $f_i^{m_i}b_i = f_i^{n_i}b$. In particular, for $m$ large enough we have that $f_i^{k_i}b_i = f_i^{m}b$. Since the $f_i$ generate the unit ideal, so do the $f_i^m$, so there exists $h_i \in A$ such that $\sum_{i=1}^nh_if_i^m = 1$. It follows that 
$$b = \sum_{i=1}^nh_if_i^m = \sum_{i=1}^{n}h_if_i^{k_i}b_i \in I_k$$
Thus $I_k = I_{k+1}$, and so the chain stabilizes.
`\end{proof}`
The [[Basic Properties of Morphisms of Schemes#^b058ea]] we now have that a scheme is locally Noetherian if and only if all affine opens are Noetherian.

Noetherian schemes are of course quasi-compact, by definition, but they are also quasi-separated. In fact this is true for locally Noetherian schemes. We begin by showing that Noetherian schemes are Noetherian topological spaces.

>[!lem] Equivalent Noetherian Topology
>A topological space $X$ is Noetherian if and only if every open subset of $X$ is compact.

`\begin{proof}`
Suppose $X$ is Noetherian and $U$ is an open subset which is not compact then there exists a strictly increasing chain $U_1\subseteq U_2 \subseteq \cdots$ of open subsets of $U$ which does not stabilizer. Taking complements we have a strictly decreasing chain of closed sets, a contradiction.

On the other hand, suppose $X$ is not Noetherian. Then there exists a strictly decreasing chain $C_1\supseteq C_2\supseteq \cdots$ of closed sets in $X$. Taking complements we obtain a strictly increasing chain $U_1\subseteq U_2\subseteq \cdots$. If $U = \bigcup_{i=1}^\infty U_i$, then by construction this is an infinite cover of $U$ with no finite subcover, so $U$ is not compact.
`\end{proof}`
>[!lem] Noetherian Scheme $\implies$ Noetherian Space
>If $N$ is a Noetherian scheme, then $N$ is Noetherian as a topological space.

^59024f

`\begin{proof}`
It suffices to show that the open subsets of a Noetherian affine scheme are quasi-compact. Let $N = \mathsf{Spec}(A)$ be a Noetherian affine scheme and let $D(I)$ for $I$ an ideal be an open affine subscheme. Then $I = f_1A+\cdots+f_nA$ for some $f_1,...,f_n \in I$, and hence $D(I) = \bigcup_{i=1}^nD(f_i)$, where $D(f_i)\cong \mathsf{Spec}(A_{f_i})$ is a basic affine open of $N$. In particular, each $D(f_i)$ is quasi-compact, so as $D(I)$ is a finite union of quasi-compact subsets it is also quasi-compact.
`\end{proof}`

>[!proposition] locally Noetherian implies Quasi-Separated
>If $N$ is a locally Noetherian scheme then $N$ is quasi-separated.

^888641

`\begin{proof}`
Recall that $N$ being quasi-separated means that the intersection of quasi-compact open subsets is quasi-compact. Note that quasi-compact open subsets of $N$ are finite unions of Noetherian affine schemes. Hence, it suffices to show that the intersection of Noetherian affine open subschemes is quasi-compact. But, such an intersection is an open subset of a Noetherian affine open subscheme, which by [[Basic Properties of Schemes#^59024f]] is quasi-compact.
`\end{proof}`

Note that [[Basic Properties of Schemes#^59024f]] also implies that any map out of a Noetherian scheme is quasi-compact, as all open subsets of a Noetherian scheme are quasi-compact. 


#### References

[^1]: The Rising Sea in nLab. (n.d.). https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/The+Rising+Sea. Accessed 20 May 2024