---
date: 2024-05-25T15:06:00
tags:
  - AlgebraicGeometry
  - Schemes
  - TextbookNotes
type: Notes
summary:
---
```table-of-contents
title: 
style: nestedList # TOC style (nestedList|nestedOrderedList|inlineFirstLevel)
minLevel: 0 # Include headings from the specified level
maxLevel: 0 # Include headings up to the specified level
includeLinks: true # Make headings clickable
debugInConsole: false # Print debug info in Obsidian console
```
## Introduction

In these notes we follow Vakil[^1] to define and investigate projective schemes on a formal level similar to that done for affine schemes in other places. These schemes are incredibly important in algebraic geometry and beyond, and in fact many are either projective or open subsets thereof. 

Although projective schemes, like all others, can be obtained by gluing affine schemes, their importance warrants a simpler description in line with that for affine schemes. 

## Projective Schemes

Before beginning let us emphasize the difficulty with only working with the affine gluing perspective.

>[!example]
>Let $\mathbb{P}^n_A$ be projective $n$-space. Let $f_i \in A[x_0,...,x_n]$ be a family of homogeneous polynomials. Then in each affine open $\mathsf{Spec}(A[x_0,...,\hat{x}_i,...,x_n])$ we obtain a family of polynomials obtained by substituting $1$ for $x_i$ which cut out a subscheme $V_i$. Since the $f_i$ are homogeneous we have that $x_i^{\text{deg}(f_i)}f_i(x_1/x_i,...,x_n/x_i) = f(x_1,\dots,x_n)$, so these cutouts are well-defined.


A better algebraic description, which will give us a functor $\mathsf{Proj}$ much like $\mathsf{Spec}$ for affine schemes will be graded rings.

### Interlude on Graded Rings

A ring $R$ is said to be graded over a monoid $N$ if $R = \bigoplus_{n \in N}R_n$ for abelian subgroups $R_n$ of $R$ such that $R_nR_m \subseteq R_{nm}$ for all $n,m \in N$. In particular, $R_e$, for $e$ the identity element in $N$, is always a subring of $R$. In most cases the grading is given by $\mathbb{Z}$ or $\mathbb{N}$ for the monoid structure given by addition. We say that the elements of $R_n$ in a graded ring $R_\bullet$ are **homogeneous elements** of $R_\bullet$, with non-zero homogeneous elements having a specified degree $n$. An ideal of $R_\bullet$ is said to be a **homogeneous ideal** or **graded ideal** if it is generated by homogeneous elements. $I$ being a homogeneous ideal means it can be decomposed as $I = \bigoplus_{n \in N}I_n$, and so $R_\bullet/I$ has a natural $N$-grading.


We can also localize $R_\bullet$ with respect to multiplicative subsets containing only homogeneous elements.

#### $\mathbb{N}$-Graded Rings

Moving forward we consider $\mathbb{N}$-graded rings. Let $R_\bullet$ be such a ring. We will say $R_\bullet$ is graded over the subring $R_0$, such as is the case for polynomial rings, and we will say that $R_0$ is the **base ring**. An important ideal, the **irrelevant ideal**, of a graded ring $R_\bullet$ is given by $$R_+ := \bigoplus_{i > 0}R_i$$
We say that $R_\bullet$ is a **finitely generated graded ring over $R_0$** if $R_+$ is a finitely generated ideal of $R_\bullet$. If $S_\bullet$ is generated by $S_1$ as an $S_0$-algebra, we say that $S_\bullet$ is **generated in degree $1$**. 

>[!proposition] Finitely Generated Graded Rings
>$R_\bullet$ is a finitely generated graded ring over $R_0$ if and only if $R_\bullet$ is a finitely generated graded $R_0$-algebra. (i.e. $R_\bullet$ is generated over $R_0$ by a finite number of homogeneous elements of positive degree).

^d9753a

`\begin{proof}`
To start let $\{x_i\}_{i \in I}$ be a set of homogeneous generators of $R_+$ as an ideal. Then if $f \in R_+$, we can write $f = \sum_{n \in \mathbb{N}}f_n$ where $f_n$ is the degree $n$ homogeneous piece of $f$, and only finitely many such pieces are non-zero. Then for each $n \geq 1$ there exists $a_{n,i_{n,1}},...,a_{n,i_{n,k_n}} \in R_0$ such that $f_n = \sum_{j=1}^{k_n}a_{n,i_{n,j}}x_{i_{n,j}}$. Thus, $f = \sum_{n \in \mathbb{N}}\sum_{j=1}^{k_n}a_{n,i_{n,j}}x_{i_{n,j}}$. It follows that $R_\bullet$ is generated as a graded $R_0$-algebra by the same generators as $R_+$ as an ideal. Thus, if $R_\bullet$ is a finitely generated graded ring over $R_0$, then $R_\bullet$ is a finitely generated graded $R_0$-algebra.

On the other hand, suppose $\{x_i\}_{i \in I}$ is a set of homogeneous generators of $R_\bullet$ as a graded $R_0$-algebra. Then $\{x_i\}_{i \in I,\deg x_i > 0}$ forms a generating set of $R_+$ as an ideal, which implies the reverse implication.
`\end{proof}`

>[!proposition] Graded Noetherian Ring
>A graded ring $R_\bullet$ is Noetherian if and only if $R_0$ is Noetherian and $R_\bullet$ is a finitely generated graded ring.

`\begin{proof}`
Since $R_0$ is a subring of $R_\bullet$ it is Noetherian whenever $R_\bullet$. Further, if $R_\bullet$ is Noetherian the necessarily $R_+$ is a finitely generated ideal. On the other hand, if $R_+$ is finitely generated and $R_0$ is Noetherian, then $R_\bullet$ being a finitely generated $R_0$-algebra by [[Projective Schemes#^d9753a]] is Noetherian by Hilbert's Basis Theorem and the fact that quotients of Noetherian rings are Noetherian.
`\end{proof}`

## The $\mathsf{Proj}$ Construction

Let $\mathsf{Gr}_M$ be the category of $M$-graded rings with $M$ a monoid, and a morphism of $M$-graded rings being a ring homomorphism $f:R_\bullet\to S_\bullet$ such that $f(R_m) \subseteq S_m$ for all $m \in M$.

We wish to define a functor $\mathsf{Proj}:\mathsf{Gr}_\mathbb{N}^{op}\to \mathsf{Sch}$. To start, fix an $\mathbb{N}$-graded ring $R_\bullet$. Note that for each homogeneous $f \in R_+$, the localization $(R_\bullet)_f$ is naturally $\mathbb{Z}$-graded where $\deg(1/f) = -\deg(f)$. We drop the bullet moving forward for ease of notation. Let $(R_f)_0$ denote the $0$-graded piece of the graded ring $R_f$. As a set let $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ consist of all **relevant homogeneous prime ideals** $R_\bullet$, which consist of all homogeneous prime ideals not containing $R_+$. 

>[!proposition] Homogeneous Prime Ideal Correpsondence
>If $A$ is $\mathbb{Z}$-graded ring and $f$ is an invertible homogeneous element of positive degree, then there is a bijection between prime ideals of $A_0$ and homogeneous prime ideals of $A$.

`\begin{proof}`
For any (homogeneous) prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ of $A$ we naturally obtain a prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}\cap A_0$ in $A_0$. On the other hand, let $\mathfrak{p}_0$ be an ideal of $A_0$. Define $\mathfrak{p}$ as the direct sum over $Q_i$, where $Q_i\subseteq A_i$ is given by all elements $a \in A_i$ such that $a^{\deg f}/f^i \in \mathfrak{p}_0$. In particular, $Q_0 = \mathfrak{p}_0$. Now, $a \in Q_i$ if and only if $a^{\deg f}/f^i \in \mathfrak{p}_0$, if and only if $a^{n\deg f}/f^{ni} \in \mathfrak{p}_0$ for some $n \in \mathbb{Z}$ (since $\mathfrak{p}_0$ is prime), if and only if $a^n \in Q_{ni}$ for some (and hence all) $n \in \mathbb{Z}$. 

Now, if $a_1,a_2 \in Q_i$ we have that $a_1^{\deg f}/f^i,a_2^{\deg f}/f^i \in \mathfrak{p}_0$. Observe that 
$$
\begin{align*}
(a_1^2+2a_1a_2+a_2^2)^{\deg f}/f^{2i} &= \sum_{j=0}^{\deg f}\sum_{k=0}^{\deg f-j}n_{j,k}a_1^{2i}(2a_1a_2)^{j}a_2^{2(\deg f-i-j)}/f^{2i} \\
&=\sum_{j=0}^{\deg f}\sum_{k=0}^{\deg f-j}2^jn_{j,k}a_1^{2i+j}a_2^{2(\deg f-i-j)+j}/f^{2i}
\end{align*}
$$
For all $j,k$, either $2i+j \geq \deg f$ or $2(\deg f-i-j)+j \geq \deg f$, so each summand can be written as $a_i^{\deg f}/f^i\cdot a$ where $a \in A_0$, so the whole sum is in $\mathfrak{p}_0$. From our previous observations $a_1+a_2 \in Q_i$, so each $Q_i$ is an abelian subgroup, and hence so is $\mathfrak{p}$. By construction $\mathfrak{p}$ will be homogeneous if we can prove it is an ideal. But this is clear since for any $a \in Q_i$ and any homogeneous element $b \in A$ of degree $j$, $(ba)^{\deg f}/f^{i+j} = b^{\deg f}/f^j\cdot a^{\deg f}/f^i \in \mathfrak{p}_0$ since $\mathfrak{p}_0$ is an ideal. Hence we have that $\mathfrak{p}$ is a homogeneous ideal.

Finally, we must show that $\mathfrak{p}$ is prime. Since it is homogeneous it suffices to show that it is prime with respect to homogeneous elements. Let $a \in A_i$ and $b \in A_j$ such that $ab \in Q_{i+j}$. Then $b^{\deg f}/f^j\cdot a^{\deg f}/f^i \in \mathfrak{p}_0$, so as $\mathfrak{p}_0$ is prime either $b^{\deg f}/f^j$ or $a^{\deg f}/f^i$ is in $\mathfrak{p}_0$. Hence, either $a \in Q_i \subseteq \mathfrak{p}$ or $b \in Q_j \subseteq\mathfrak{p}$. In general consider $f = \sum_{n \in \mathbb{Z}}f_n$ and $g = \sum_{n \in \mathbb{Z}}g_n$ such that $fg = \sum_{n \in \mathbb{Z}}\sum_{p+q=n}f_pg_q \in \mathfrak{p}$. Since $\mathfrak{p}$ is homogeneous we have that $\sum_{p+q=n}f_pg_q \in \mathfrak{p}$ for all $n$. Towards a contradiction suppose $f,g \notin \mathfrak{p}$. Then there exists $m,n \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $f_m,g_n \notin \mathfrak{p}$. Let $m,n$ be maximal with respect to this property. Then $f_mg_n$ is in the component $\sum_{p+q=m+n}f_pg_q$, but not in $\mathfrak{p}$. By maximality of $m$ and $n$ we must have that $f_pg_q \in \mathfrak{p}$ for all $p > m$ and all $q > n$ with $p+q = m+n$. But then $f_mg_n \in \mathfrak{p}+ \sum_{p+q=m+n,(p,q)\neq (m,n)}f_pg_q = \mathfrak{p}$, a contradiction since $\mathfrak{p}$ is prime with respect to homogeneous elements. Thus, $\mathfrak{p}$ must itself be prime. 

Composing these two operations naturally fixes a prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}_0$ of $A_0$. On the other hand, if we start with a homogeneous prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ of $A$, then if $a \in \mathfrak{p}$ is a homogeneous element of degree $i$ we have that $a^{\deg f}/f^i \in \mathfrak{p}_0 \subseteq \mathfrak{p}$. On the other hand, if $a \in A$ is a homogeneous element of degree $i$ such that $a^{\deg f}/f^i \in \mathfrak{p}_0 \subseteq \mathfrak{p}$, the $a^{\deg f} \in \mathfrak{p}$, and since prime ideals are radical $a \in \mathfrak{p}$. Thus, $\mathfrak{p}$ is exactly the ideal constructed from $\mathfrak{p}_0$ above.
`\end{proof}`
It follows that $\mathsf{Spec}((R_f)_0)$ can be thought of as a subset of $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ under this bijection. 

 >[!def] Projective Vanishing Set
 >If $T$ is a set of homogeneous elements of $R_\bullet$ of positive degree, the **projective vanishing set of $T$**, $V(T) \subseteq \mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$, is defined to be the set of those homogeneous prime ideals containing $T$ but not $S_+$. 
 >
 >We call $D(f) := \mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)\backslash V(f)$, for $f \in R_\bullet$ homogeneous, the **projective distinguished open set associated with $f$**.
 
 Observe that $D(f)$ consists of those homogeneous prime ideals that do not contain $f$, but under the prime ideal correspondence for localizations this is exactly $\mathsf{Spec}((R_f)_0)$ under our identification. A similar proof to the affine case shows that the $V(I)$ provide a **Zariski topology** on $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ via closed sets. Note that if $I$ is generated by $f_j, j \in J$, then $D(I) = \bigcup_{j \in J}D(f_j)$, so as $D(f)\cap D(g) = D(fg)$ is a distinguished open, the distinguished opens for a base for the Zariski topology on $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$. 


### Properties of $V$ and $I$

In order to understand our construction and its relation to $\mathsf{Spec}$ a bit better we spend some time to expand on properties of homogeneous ideals and the functions $V$ and $I$. Note that if $R_\bullet$ is a commutative graded ring, then without loss of generality its grading $M$ can be taken to be a commutative monoid.

>[!proposition] Operations on Homogeneous Ideals
>1. An ideal is homogeneous if and only if it contains the degree $m$ piece of each of its elements for each $m \in M$.
>2. Homogeneous ideals are closed under sum
>3. Homogeneous ideals are closed under product
>4. Homogeneous ideals are closed under intersection
>5. Homogeneous ideals are closed under radical (when $M = \mathbb{Z}$)
>6. A Homogeneous ideal is prime if and only if it is prime with respect to homogeneous elements (when $M = \mathbb{Z}$)
>7. If $I$ is a homogeneous ideal of a graded ring $R_\bullet$ over a monoid $M$ consisting of Homogeneous elements, then $R_\bullet/I$ has a natural structure as a $M$-graded ring.
>8. If $T$ is a multiplicative subset of a graded ring $R_\bullet$ over a monoid $M$ consisting of Homogeneous elements, then $T^{-1}R_\bullet$ has a natural structure as a $G(M)$-graded ring, where $G(M)$ is the group-completion of $M$.

^2eac52

`\begin{proof}`
**(1):** If $I$ contains the degree $m$ piece of each of its elements, for all $m \in M$, then the set of all such homogeneous pieces generate $I$ and hence witness it as a homogeneous ideal. On the other hand, if $I$ is a homogeneous ideal we have a generating set $\{x_i\}_{i \in I}$ by homogeneous elements. If $f \in I$, then $f = \sum_{i \in I}a_ix_i$ for $a_i \in R_\bullet$. Expanding and grouping based on degree we have that all terms in the sum for each degree lie in $I$, so in particular each degree $m$ piece of $f$ lies in $I$.

**(2):** If $I$ and $J$ are homogeneous ideals then there sum is generated by the union of the generators of $I$ and $J$, which is a set of homogeneous elements, and so $I+J$ is homogeneous.

**(3):** The product $IJ$ is generated by products of the generators of $I$ and $J$, which can be taken to be homogeneous, so $IJ$ is also generated by homogeneous elements, and hence is a homogeneous ideal.

**(4):** If $f \in I\cap J$, then the degree $m$ piece of $f$ is in $I$ and $J$ for all $m$, and hence in $I\cap J$ for all $m$. By (1) $I\cap J$ is a homogeneous ideal.

**(5):** Let $f \in \sqrt{I}$. Then $f^n \in I$ for some $n \geq 1$. Let $n_0 \in \mathbb{N}$ be the largest natural number such that $f_{n_0} \neq 0$ or $f_{-n_0} \neq 0$. Then the lowest or highest degree piece of $f^n$ is $f_{n_0}^n,f_{-n_0}^n$, which will lie in $I$ since its homogeneous. Thus, $f_{n_0},f_{-n_0} \in \sqrt{I}$. Then $f-f_{n_0}-f_{-n_0} \in \sqrt{I}$ with strictly smaller absolute degree. Proceeding by induction on the absolute degree we have that $\sqrt{I}$ contains all homogeneous pieces of $f$, and hence is homogeneous by (1).

**(6):** If $I$ is prime it is indeed prime with respect to homogeneous elements in particular, so suppose otherwise. Then let $a,b \in R_\bullet$ such that $ab \in I$. Suppose $a,b \notin I$. Since $I$ is  homogeneous there exist $n,m \in \mathbb{Z}$, maximal, such that $a_n,b_m \notin I$. Since $I$ is homogeneous it also contains the $n+m$ piece of $ab$, which is $\sum_{p+q=n+m}a_pb_q$. By maximality we have that $a_pb_q \in I$ for any $p > n$ or any $q > m$. But this implies that $a_nb_m \in I-\sum_{p+q=n+m,p>n}a_pb_q = I$. As $I$ is prime with respect to homogeneous elements, it follows that either $a_n \in I$ or $b_m \in I$, which is a contradiction. Thus $I$ must be prime.

**(7):** Let $I \subseteq R_\bullet$ be a homogeneous ideal. Then $I = \bigoplus_{m \in M}I_m$ as $I$ contains the $m$ homogeneous piece of all of its elements. Then since quotients commute with sums we have that $$R_\bullet/I \cong \bigoplus_{m \in M}R_m/I_m$$
where $\overline{x}_m\cdot \overline{x}_n := \overline{x_mx_n}$. To see that this is well-defined suppose $x_m-y_m \in I$. Then $x_mx_n = (x_m-y_m)x_n+y_mx_n$, which implies $\overline{x_mx_n} = \overline{y_mx_n}$. Thus, $R_\bullet/I$ is a graded ring over $M$.

**(8):** Let $T$ be a multiplicative subset of $R_\bullet$ consisting of homogeneous elements. Let $G(M)$ be the free group generated by $M$, which is necessarily abelian since $M$ is commutative. Define $T^{-1}R_\bullet$ as for rings, and set $$(T^{-1}R_\bullet)_m = \{a \in T^{-1}R_\bullet \mid \exists x\in R_\bullet^{homo},s \in T, a = x/s, \deg(x)=m\deg(s)\}$$
for all $m \in G(M)$. To show this is well defined suppose $r/s = r'/s'$. Then there exists $t \in T$ such that $trs' = tr's$. If $trs' = tr's \neq 0$, then we have that $\deg(t)\deg(r)\deg(s')=\deg(t)\deg(r')\deg(s)$, and so
$$\deg(t)m\deg(s)\deg(s') = \deg(t)m'\deg(s')\deg(s)$$
Since $M$ is commutative its group completion $G(M)$ is abelian, and so $m = m'$. Otherwise, if $trs' = tr's = 0$, then $ts'r = 0$ and $tsr' = 0$, where $ts',ts \in T$, so $r/s$ and $r'/s'$ are $0$. Thus, the grading is well-defined and multiplicative on non-zero elements, which suffices to provide a grading.
`\end{proof}`
The properties in [[Projective Schemes#^2eac52]] allow us to carry over a number of facts for $V$ from the affine case:

>[!proposition] Properties of $V$
>Let $R_\bullet$ be an $M$-graded ring. Then the following hold:
>1. If $(a_i)_{i \in I}$ is a family of homogeneous ideals then $\bigcap_{i \in I}V(a_i) = V(\sum_{i \in I}a_i)$
>2. If $(a_i)_{i \in I}$ is a finite family of homogeneous ideals then $\bigcup_{i \in I}V(a_i) = V\left( \bigcap_{i \in I}a_i \right) = V\left( \prod_{i \in I}a_i \right)$ 
>3. If $I \subseteq J$ are homogeneous ideals, then $V(I) \supseteq V(J)$

^38b7d8



We now define and prove properties $I$.

>[!def] Homogeneous Vanishing Ideal
>If $Z$ is a subset of $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$, then the **projective vanishing ideal** for $Z$ is given by $$I(Z) = \{f \in R_\bullet\mid \forall \mathfrak{p} \in Z, f \in \mathfrak{p} \}$$

Note that $I(Z)$ is homogeneous since each $\mathfrak{p} \in Z$ is. From this definition we immediately obtain a number of useful properties of $I$ from those for affine schemes.

>[!proposition] Properties of $I$
>If $R_\bullet$ is an $M$-graded ring, then the following hold:
>1. If $Z_1 \subseteq Z_2$ are subsets of $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$, then $I(Z_1) \supseteq I(Z_2)$
>2. If $Z$ is a subset of $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ then $V(I(Z)) = \overline{Z}$ and $I(V(I(Z))) = I(Z)$
>3. If $a$ is a homogeneous ideal in $R_\bullet$, then $I(V(a)) = \sqrt{a}$ and $V(I(V(a))) = V(a)$.

^6d3394

`\begin{proof}`
**(1):** The case for (1) is immediate since $I(Z) = \bigcap_{\mathfrak{p}\in Z}\mathfrak{p}$, so if $Z_1 \subseteq Z_2$ then $Z_2$ will be taking an intersection over a larger collection of ideals.

**(2):** First observe that $$V(I(Z)) = V(\bigcap_{\mathfrak{p} \in Z}\mathfrak{p}) = \{\mathfrak{q} \in \mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)\mid \bigcap_{\mathfrak{p} \in Z}\mathfrak{p}\subseteq \mathfrak{q}\}$$
which includes all primes in $Z$ by definition of the intersection. Thus, $V(I(Z))$ is a closed set containing $Z$. On the other hand, if $V(a) \supseteq Z$ for some ideal $a$, then $a \subseteq \bigcap_{\mathfrak{p}\in Z}\mathfrak{p}$, so $V(a) \supseteq V(I(Z))$ by (1). Thus it is the smallest closed set, and so $V(I(Z)) = \overline{Z}$.

**(3):** Observe that 
$$I(V(a)) = \bigcap_{\mathfrak{p} \in V(a)}\mathfrak{p} = \bigcap_{\mathfrak{p} \in \mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet),a \subseteq \mathfrak{p}}\mathfrak{p} = \sqrt{a}$$
where the last equality follows from the fact that $a$ is homogeneous. Observe that $V(I(V(a))) \subseteq V(\sqrt{a})$. Further, if $\mathfrak{p} \in V(\sqrt{a})$, then $a \subseteq \sqrt{a} \subseteq \mathfrak{p}$, so $\mathfrak{p} \in V(a)$, and consequently $\bigcap_{\mathfrak{p}\in V(a)}\mathfrak{p}\subseteq \mathfrak{p}$, which implies $\mathfrak{p} \in V(I(V(a)))$. Thus $V(I(V(a))) = V(a) = V(\sqrt{a})$.
`\end{proof}`
We also have the following characterization of when $V(I) = \emptyset$ which helps to motivate the name **irrelevant ideal** for $R_+$.

>[!proposition] Irrelevant
>If $I$ is a homogeneous ideal of $R_\bullet$ then the following are equivalent
>1. $V(I) = \emptyset$
>2. If $\{f_j\}_{j \in J}$ is a homogeneous generating set for $I$, then $\bigcup_{j \in J}D(f_j) = \mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$
>3. $\sqrt{I}\supseteq R_+$.

`\begin{proof}`
Note that $I = \sum_{j \in J}f_jR_\bullet$. Then by part (1) of [[Projective Schemes#^38b7d8]] we have that
$$D(I) = \bigcup_{j \in J}D(f_j)$$
Thus, (1) and (2) are equivalent.

By part (3) of [[Projective Schemes#^6d3394]] we have that $V(I) = V(\sqrt{I})$. Further, if $a$ is a homogeneous ideal of $R_\bullet$ and $a \supseteq R_+$, then by definition $V(a) = \emptyset$, so (3) implies (1). On the other hand, if $\sqrt{I} \nsupseteq R_+$, then there exists a homogeneous prime ideal $\mathfrak{p} \supseteq I$ such that $\mathfrak{p}\nsupseteq R_+$, and so $\mathfrak{p} \in V(I)$.
`\end{proof}`

### Scheme Structure on $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$

Throughout let $R_\bullet$ be an $\mathbb{N}$-graded ring with irrelevant ideal $R_+$. We wish to show that $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ is locally affine. Recall that for $f \in R_+$ homogeneous, we can consider $\mathsf{Spec}((R_f)_0)$ as a subset of $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ by expanding a prime $\mathfrak{p}_0 \in (R_f)_0$ to a homogeneous prime ideal $\mathfrak{p} \in R_f$, and then taking the pre-image in the localization to obtain a homogeneous prime ideal $\mathfrak{p}$ in $R_\bullet$.

>[!proposition] Prime Correspondence for Localization of Graded Rings
>Let $R_\bullet$ be a $M$-graded ring and let $T \subseteq R_\bullet$ be a multiplicative subset of homogeneous elements. Then there is a bijection between homogeneous prime ideals of $T^{-1}R_\bullet$ and homogeneous prime ideals of $R_\bullet$, $\mathfrak{p}$, such that $T\cap \mathfrak{p} = \emptyset$.

`\begin{proof}`
The bijection is that for the localization of rings. Thus, we need only ensure that the bijection sends homogeneous prime ideals to homogeneous prime ideals. First, let $\mathfrak{p} \subseteq R_\bullet$ be a homogeneous prime ideal such that $T\cap \mathfrak{p} = \emptyset$. If $\{x_i\}_{i \in I}$ are the homogeneous generators of $\mathfrak{p}$, then $\{x_i/t\}_{i \in I,t \in T}$ form a generating set of homogeneous generators for $\mathfrak{p}T^{-1}R_\bullet$.

On the other hand, if $\{x_i/t_i\}_{i \in I}$ are homogeneous generators of a homogeneous prime ideal $\mathfrak{p} \subseteq T^{-1}R_\bullet$, then $\{x_i\}_{i \in I}$ form a homogeneous generating set for $\mathfrak{p}\cap R_\bullet$. 
`\end{proof}`
We will want to induce our scheme structure on $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ from the basic opens $D(f)$ which correspond to $\mathsf{Spec}((R_f)_0)$, viewed as subsets of $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$. To do this we must first show that our identification is in fact an isomorphism on the level of topological spaces onto an open subset of $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$. However, under the identification of $D(f)$ with $\mathsf{Spec}((R_f)_0)$, a homogeneous prime $\mathfrak{p} \in D(f)$ is sent to $\mathfrak{p}R_f\cap (R_f)_0$. In particular, if $I$ is a homogeneous ideal in $R_\bullet$, then $V(I)\cap D(f)$ consists of those homogeneous prime ideals which contain $I$ but not $f$. Under our identification, the image of $V(I)\cap D(f)$ in $R_f$ consists of homogeneous prime ideals containing $IR_f$. Finally, taking the degree zero piece, we have the collection of all prime ideals in $(R_f)_0$ which contain $(IR_f)_0$. Going the opposite way gives a similar identification, so we indeed have a homeomorphism of topological spaces
$$D(f)\cong \mathsf{Spec}((R_f)_0)$$
If $f,g \in R_+$ are homogeneous and non-zero, we have a natural map of rings $\varphi:(R_f)_0\to (R_{fg})_0$ given by $\varphi(r/f^n) = rg^n/(fg)^n$. Further, note that $g^{\deg(f)}/f^{\deg(g)} \in (R_f)_0$, which is sent to $g^{\deg(fg)}/(fg)^{\deg(g)}$, is invertible in $(R_{fg})_0$. Indeed, observe that
$$\frac{g^{\deg(fg)}}{(fg)^{\deg(g)}}\cdot \frac{f^{\deg(fg)}}{(fg)^{\deg(f)}} = \frac{(fg)^{\deg(fg)}}{(fg)^{\deg(fg)}}=1$$
Thus, we have a natural map $\widetilde{\varphi}:((R_f)_0)_{g^{\deg(f)}/f^{\deg(g)}}\to (R_{fg})_0$. Further, for any $r/(fg)^n \in (R_{fg})_0$, it is the image of 
$$\frac{r(fg)^{n(\deg(f)-1)}}{f^{n\deg(fg)}}\Bigg/\left(\frac{g^{\deg(f)}}{f^{\deg(g)}}\right)^n \mapsto \frac{r(fg)^{n(\deg(f)-1)}g^{n\deg(fg)}}{(fg)^{n\deg(fg)}}\cdot\frac{f^{n\deg(fg)}}{(fg)^{n\deg(f)}}=\frac{r}{(fg)^n}$$
using the fact that $\deg(f) \geq 1$, so $\widetilde{\varphi}$ is surjective, and if $r/f^n$ maps to zero, then there exists $m \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $(fg)^mg^nr = 0$. On the other hand, $r/f^n$ being zero means there exists $k \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $rg^{\deg(f)+k}/f^{\deg(f)+k+n}=0$ in $(R_f)_0$, so there exists $\ell \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $f^\ell g^{\deg(f)+k}r = 0$ in $R_\bullet$. Since we can multiply by $g^\ell$ in the second expression and $g^{\deg(f)}$ in the first, these conditions are equivalent so $\widetilde{\varphi}$ is an isomorphism. Explicitly, the inverse map sends $r/(fg)^n$ to $(r(fg)^{n(\deg(f)-1)}/f^{n\deg(fg)}) / (g^{\deg(f)}/f^{\deg(g)})^n$. 


It follows that we have an isomorphism
$$((R_f)_0)_{g^{\deg(f)} / f^{\deg(g)}}\xrightarrow{\cong} (R_{fg})_0\xrightarrow{\cong}((R_g)_0)_{f^{\deg(g)} / g^{\deg(f)}}$$
given by sending $$(r / f^n) / (g^{\deg(f)}/f^{\deg(g)})^k \mapsto r f^{k\deg(fg)}g^n / (fg)^{k\deg(f)+n}$$
which is then mapped to
$$(rf^{k\deg(fg)}g^n(fg)^{(k\deg(f)+n)(\deg(g)-1)}/g^{(k\deg(f)+n)\deg(fg)}) / (f^{\deg(g)}/g^{\deg(f)})^{k\deg(f)+n}$$
which equals
$$(r f^{k\deg(g)+n\deg(g)-n}/ g^{n\deg(f)+k\deg(f)}) / (f^{\deg(g)}/g^{\deg(f)})^n$$
From the uniqueness of the map out of the localization we have that for $h \in R_\bullet$ homogeneous of degree $\geq 1$, the composite
$$((R_{f})_0)_{(gh)^{\deg(f)} / f^{\deg(gh)}}\xrightarrow{\cong}((R_g)_0)_{(fh)^{\deg(g)}/g^{\deg(fg)}}\xrightarrow{\cong} ((R_h)_0)_{(fg)^{\deg(h)} / h^{\deg(fg)}}$$
equals the map $((R_{f})_0)_{(gh)^{\deg(f)} / f^{\deg(gh)}}\xrightarrow{\cong} ((R_h)_0)_{(fg)^{\deg(h)} / h^{\deg(fg)}}$. Thus, by [[Sheaf on a Base and Gluing Sheaves#^ddc1f7]] we have a structure sheaf $\mathcal{O}_{\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)}$ making $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ into a scheme, which is given on basic opens by the structure sheaf of affine schemes associated with rings $(R_f)_0$. 

From the work in [[Espace Etale Picture of Sheaves]] we can also view $\mathcal{O}_{\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)}$ to be the sheaf of functions $U\to \prod_{\mathfrak{p} \in \mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)}(R_\mathfrak{p})_0$ which locally are given by quotients of elements in $R_\bullet$. 

>[!remark]
>Observe that by construction for a cring $A$ the **projective scheme** $\mathsf{Proj}(A[x_0,...,x_n])$ satisfies the gluing data associated with $\mathbb{P}_A^n$, and so we can define $\mathbb{P}^n_A$ to be the output of this proj functor.

Observe that when each point $[a_0,...,a_n]$ of classical projective space corresponds to the homogeneous prime ideal $\langle a_ix_j-a_jx_i\mid 0\leq i,j\leq n\rangle$ in $k[x_0,...,x_n]$. 

>[!def] Projective and Quasiprojective Schemes
>If $R_\bullet$ is finitely generated as a graded ring over a cring $A$, we say that $\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet)$ is a scheme **projective scheme over $A$**. A **quasi-projective $A$-scheme** is a quasi-compact open subscheme of a projective $A$-scheme.

Note that all open affine subschemes of a projective scheme are necessarily quasi-projective. Further, $\mathsf{Proj}(A[T]) = D(T) \cong \mathsf{Spec}((A[T]_T)_0) \cong \mathsf{Spec}(A)$, so all affine schemes are "**projective $A$-schemes**".

>[!example] Projectivization of a Module
>Let $M$ be a module over a ring $A$. Define $\mathsf{Sym}^\bullet(M^\lor) = A\oplus M^\lor\oplus \mathsf{Sym}^2(V^\lor)\oplus\cdots$, where $M^\lor = \mathsf{Hom}_A(M,A)$, and $\mathsf{Sym}^n(M^\lor) = M^\lor\otimes_A\cdots\otimes_AM^\lor/\Sigma_n$, and multiplication is given by tensoring. Then we define
>$$\mathbb{P}M := \mathsf{Proj}(\mathsf{Sym}^{\bullet}(M^\lor))$$


## Maps of Projective Schemes

Recall that we have a very nice description of maps of affine schemes due to the fact that the functor $\mathsf{Spec}:\mathsf{CRing}\to \mathsf{Sch}$ is fully-faithful. Namely, maps of affine schemes are exactly maps of rings in the opposite direction. We would like a similarly useful description for projective schemes due to their prevalence. However, there are right from the outset a number of issues:
- Maps of graded rings do not always give maps of projective schemes
- Not all maps of projective schemes come from maps of graded rings
- different maps of graded rings can induce the same map of schemes.
We begin by proving a semi-result.

>[!proposition] Maps of Graded Rings
>Let $\phi:S_\bullet\to R_\bullet$ be a morphisms of graded rings (i.e. there exists $d > 0$ in $\mathbb{N}$ such that $S_n\mapsto R_{dn}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$). Then $\phi$ induces a morphism of schemes $(\mathsf{Proj}(R_\bullet))\backslash V(\phi(S_+))\to \mathsf{Proj}(S_\bullet)$. 

`\begin{proof}`
We prove the claim by gluing morphisms. Let $f \in S_+$ be a homogeneous element and define a map $D(\phi(f))\to D(f)$ by the map $(S_f)_0\to (R_{\phi(f)})_0$ induced by the universal property of the localization applied to the map $\phi$, and using the fact that $\phi$ is a morphism of graded rings. If $g \in S_+$ is another element, then the map $D(\phi(f))\cap D(\phi(g))\to D(f)$ factors through the inclusion $D(f)\cap D(g)\hookrightarrow D(f)$ by the universal property of the localization. Thus, the maps agree on intersections, and hence we have a unique map of schemes by [[Basic Properties of Morphisms of Schemes#^885e6a]]. If $\phi$ is a morphism of $A$-algebras, for some cring $A$, then the induced map on the level of schemes is a morphism of $A$-schemes.
`\end{proof}`
>[!example]
>Consider the map of complex projective manifolds $\mathbb{CP}^1\to \mathbb{CP}^2$ given by $[s:t] \mapsto [s^{20}:s^9t^{11}:t^{20}]$. Interpreting this algebraically we have a map of projective schemes induced by a Cring homomorphism $\phi:\mathbb{C}[x,y,z]\to \mathbb{C}[s,t]$, where $x\mapsto s^{20},y\mapsto s^9t^{11},$ and $z\mapsto t^{20}$. Note that $\phi(\mathbb{C}[x,y,z]_+) = \langle s^{20},s^9t^{11},t^{20}\rangle$, which has radical $\mathbb{C}[s,t]_+$, so the map is defined everywhere.




#### References

[^1]: The Rising Sea in nLab. (n.d.). https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/The+Rising+Sea. Accessed 20 May 2024